\section{Introduction}
Since past few decades, processor and memory scaling has been enabled
with different philosophies in mind.  While processor scaling focused
on speed improvements, memory scaling was centred around increasing
the storage capacity.  The process technology reaching scaling
limitations led to Memory Wall\cite{MemWall} - the increasing
performance gap between the processor speed and the memory speeds.
Various techniques have been developed to combat this widening gap.
Data prefetching is one such important technique.  Data prefetching
exploits the fact that in most applications, memory accesses have a
well-defined pattern.

An ideal prefetching scheme involves capturing this memory access
patterns to predict future prefetches in a timely manner.  Other
important decisions faced by the prefetcher are when to bring in the
prefetch block of data, which level of cache hierarchy to place the
block in and finally, what block to evict to accommodate the incoming
block.  Memory accesses patterns can be as simple as fetching the next
cache line or a complex but predictable pattern, like in pointer
chasing applications.  Predicting this often requires a trade-off
between coverage and accuracy.  For a prefetcher to capture highly
irregular access patterns, it needs to be highly aggressive (high
coverage).  That also means the prefetcher would end up recommending a
lot of useless prefetches, leading to cache pollution (low accuracy).
This effect would get even more pronounced in multi-core scenario
where the last level cache is a shared resource.  Conversely, a
conservative prefetcher would be highly accurate but might not make
enough useful predictions.

To this effect we propose SPP-Perc <come up with a catchy name>.  It
is an enhancement to the existing state of the art prefetcher and
overcomes the coverage vs accuracy trade-off in a robust manner.  The
idea is to modify SPP design to make it as aggressive as it can get.
This enables SPP to capture complex memory access patterns hence
leading to increased coverage.  This comes at a cost of increased DRAM
traffic, hence reduction in overall IPC.  The prefetch suggestions
recommended by SPP pass through the perceptron based throttler.  Over
time, perceptron layer learns to correlate the prefetches recommended
by SPP with various available features, leading to elimination of
useless prefetches.  This leads to an overall increased accuracy of
the prefetch scheme and reduction in DRAM traffic.

\vspace{1ex}This paper talks about SPP-Perc, its merits, analysis and
future scope for expansion.  The contributions made by this paper are:

\begin{itemize}
\item This is the first time where a truly on-line learning based
  neural network model has been used when it comes to hardware data
  prefetching.  The prior works in this area either relied on program
  semantics\cite{Semantics} or were application
  specific\cite{Datacenter} or could not yield a significant
  improvement over the baseline prefetcher used\cite{BadPerc}.

\item Implementing the pereptron throttler in a robust and accurate
  practical prefetching mechanism.  The overall scheme yields
  increased accuracy as compared to the other state of the art
  prefetchers.  Moreover, the perceptron throttler learns to adapt
  itself to shared resource constraints - leading to an even increased
  performance in multi-core and lower capacity / bandwidth
  environments.

\item Examining the perceptron weights doing a statistical study to
  quantify the contribution made by each feature.  We have also used
  this idea to develop a comprehensive set of features where each
  feature contributes some `new' information to the perceptron.  The
  details are explained under methodology, in Section XX.

\item Cross-validating the design across benchmarks.  All the
  development and parameter tuning was done on the SPEC 2017
  benchmark.  The results have been shown to be consistent across
  unseen benchmarks.  More details can be found in the results section
  (Section XX).

  % \item Designing the prefetcher keeping SPEC 2017 benchmark suite
  %   in mind.  We have used SPEC 2017 to compare SPP-Perc against the
  %   highest performing prefetchers.  We have also used our
  %   prefetcher to characterize memory intensive benchmarks of the
  %   SPEC 2017 suite, with respect to prefetching.

  % \item We came up with an efficient model to use the perceptron
  %   output as a representation of the prefetch confidence using an
  %   on-line histogram technique.  We show how the simple sum can
  %   replace the existing mechanism which was essentially based on
  %   counting the number of hits for a particular entry in SPP.

\end{itemize}

We tested SPP-Perc on Champsim, an open source simulator which models
an Out-of-Order CPU using.  For evaluation, we used SPEC 2017
benchmarks.  On a single core configuration, SPP-Perc increases
performance of the system by 39.5\% as compared to the baseline with
no prefetching, on the memory intensive subset of the benchmark.  This
outperforms the next best prefetcher, SPP, by 6.84\%.  On a multi-core
system running a mix of memory intensive subset of the SPEC 2017
traces, SPP-Perc saw an improvement of 11.9\% over SPP for 4-core
system and 10.67\% for 8-core system.

In the results part in section XX, we show a detailed analysis of the
speedup achieved.  We also used SPEC 2006 and CloudSuite benchmarks
for cross-validation of the prefetcher implementation.

The rest of the paper is organized as follows.  Section 2 talks about
background work and recaptures the SPP architecture Section 3
discusses the detailed implementation of the perceptron mechanism and
the features used.  Section 4 consists of the evaluation methodology
and explores the feature space for perceptron learning.  Section 5 is
the performance evaluation of our prefetcher and Section 6 concludes
the paper.
